---
layout: single
title: "1.2 : La valeur dans les communs"
header:
    image : /assets/images/chapitre1.png
sidebar:
  nav: "book"
toc: true
toc_label: "Accès rapide"
toc_sticky: true
read_time: true
---

Le présent rapport s'appuie sur les conclusions de nos précédents rapports de recherche.

Le projet de recherche P2P Value [^23] a montré qu'une majorité des 300 projets de production par les pairs étudiés étaient engagés dans l'utilisation, le prototypage ou l'expérimentation de la comptabilité contributive, c'est-à-dire des formes de comptabilité non basées sur le travail horaire mais reconnaissant toutes les autres manières de contribuer dans ces communautés de production ouvertes et sans permission.

Notre étude, Value in the Commons Economy (Bawens & Niaros, 2017), basée sur différentes études de cas de communautés avancées de production par les pairs telles qu'Enspiral et Sensorica, a décrit les concepts et pratiques suivants :

- Les nouvelles communautés de production de pairs sont directement orientées vers la production de valeur d'usage, et non de valeur d'échange, et revendiquent la "souveraineté des valeurs", en d'autres termes, le droit de déterminer des régimes de valeurs basés sur le contexte qui diffèrent de la seule reconnaissance de la valeur commerciale sous le capitalisme. Cela permet un flux de valeur autonome au sein des communautés et la reconnaissance de toutes sortes de contributions, et pas seulement du "travail marchand" rémunéré.
- Ces nouvelles communautés créent une membrane entre les biens communs et le marché, ce qui leur permet de réguler les flux de valeur entre les revenus du marché et les modèles de valeur basés sur l'État, ainsi que le flux interne au sein des biens communs, qui peuvent être différenciés les uns des autres. En d'autres termes, il est possible d'accepter des revenus provenant de l'extérieur des biens communs, tout en les distribuant selon les normes d'un bien commun particulier. 
- Nous avons reconnu trois modèles : un modèle dans lequel les biens communs et le marché sont clairement délimités, permettant des contributions gratuites, non payées et un usage libre au sein des biens communs, qui est ainsi protégé contre la contamination par les logiques d'échange du marché ; un deuxième modèle dans lequel les contributions sont récompensées par une équation de valeur différente, qui sont ensuite financées de manière post hoc par les revenus du marché et de l'État ; et, enfin, un troisième qui lie plus intimement et directement les contributions des biens communs aux revenus du marché.
- Ces communautés pratiquent et expérimentent la cooptation inverse des revenus du marché et des investissements, c'est-à-dire le "transvestissement" [^24]. Alors que l'investissement consiste à utiliser le capital pour obtenir plus de capital, le transvestissement utilise les investissements du marché et de l'État, mais les traduit par la croissance des actifs communs et des infrastructures. Par exemple, le capital est attiré et même rémunéré, mais il augmente le stock commun de logiciels libres, ou les terres communales dans une fiducie foncière, etc. L'une des techniques consiste à créer un mur entre les investissements et les entités génératrices qui créent des moyens de subsistance pour les roturiers.
- Quelques-uns expérimentent de nouvelles formes de licences, à mi-chemin entre les licences de gauche d'auteur "gratuites pour tous" et les modèles de privatisation des licences de droits d'auteur. Dans les modèles de copyfair, le partage des connaissances reste entièrement libre, mais la commercialisation est conditionnée par certaines formes de réciprocité requise avec le bien commun.

A landmark study for us has been our research publication about the ‘Thermodynamics of Peer Production’ [^27]. In this study, we show the vital impact of mutualization of infrastructures of production and consumption, to the lowering of humanity’s footprint, which is already visible, among other places, in the local commons-centric food economy. This is also obvious in the sharing of resources, for example, in car-sharing that follows non-profit or cooperative modalities (but DOESN’T use models like Uber, which augment resource use), where every shared car can replace from 5 to 15 private cars,[^28] thus dramatically reducing the needs for matter and energy expenditure.

These advantages were confirmed in our study of the urban commons in Ghent, where we were able to determine that, for every single provisioning system in the city, there are now no longer just choices between private and public models (say private housing vs state-sponsored social housing), but also commons-based alternatives (such as commons-based cooperative housing modalities). Various studies have confirmed, at least for car-sharing, that this type of mutualization effectively overcomes Jevons Paradox, which states that lowering cost and efficiency often leads to higher consumption. Our challenge is to place the advantages of mutualization in lowering the human footprint in a sufficient systemic change effort, so that gains in one sector are not undone by higher consumption in other sectors.

We cannot stress this enough: putting commons center stage, i.e., shared resources self-managed by their stakeholder communities, is a vital necessity in any social and ecological transition. This is confirmed by the HANDY study,[^29] which compares resource crisis moments of hundreds of past civilizations, starting from the Neolithic period. Far from being exceptional, HANDY shows that civilizational collapses are a regular occurence in class-based societies, where ruling classes are perforce engaged in competition with their peers and, driven by this necessity, over-use their local resource base to the point of collapse.

The study shows that inequality is a vital part of accelerating and deepening such collapses: the more unequal the society, the more egregious the over- use, the deeper the fall, and the longer it takes to recover. Equality mitigates these crises, and can perhaps even avoid them. Mark Whitaker [^30] has produced a comparative study of more recent collapses and resets in China, Japan, and Europe, and has shown the vital role of mutualization in the revival of these societies. Notice the parallel between the role of pan-European exchange of knowledge by Christian monastic communities, the mutualization of their production infrastructures in the monasteries, and the relocalization of production in the feudal domains, with the current emerging reactions: the creation of vast open-source and open-design communities, new forms of mutualizations of infrastructures in the models of coworking and makerspaces, as well as the ‘sharing economy,’ and the increasing experimentation with cosmo-local models of distributed manufacturing.

Changing class dynamics and structures within society is an important part of any systemic change. The shift from the Roman system, based on conquest and slavery, to the feudal system, based on local production in local territory, was a shift from slavery to serfdom and from slave-holding to feudal status. The shift from feudalism to capitalism was a shift from serfdom to working in factories, from land ownership to ownership of investment and financial capital.

In our analysis, the current evolution involves a shift towards netarchical capitalism, i.e., the direct exploitation and capture of value, not from commodity labor in factories and offices, but from peer to peer exchange in platforms and from participating in commons-based peer production. In other words, the new capitalism is a commons-extracting capitalism, which directly enables, but also exploits, human cooperation [^31].

One could say that we have evolved from a Marxian capitalism, with surplus value directly extracted from labor as a commodity, to a Proudhonian capitalism, since the latter argued that surplus value was derived from the extra value generated by human cooperation.[^32] In this particular conjuncture, we see increasingly larger parts of the working class evolving, at least in Western countries, from a subordinate salariat to a condition of generalized precarity (some call it ‘the precariat’) (Standing, 2011),[^33] but this also involves the growth of post-subordinate autonomous workers who are simultaneously involved in networks, commons, and markets.[^34] These workers need to participate in networks to create connections, expertise and reputational capital, and are often passionately involved in contribution-based and permissionless digital commons; but they often operate as freelancers in the market. They frequently have a strong desire for and demand autonomy and free cooperation. In many ways, this ‘cognitive working class’ is at the forefront of social change today, becoming an active agent in the transformation of the system, largely due to their vital place in the knowledge ecosystem. This is evident in the growth of open source economies tied to the urban commons and other areas beyond what is usually perceived as “knowledge work.” In this report we will concentrate on the growth of systems of production and distribution of value using distributed ledgers, or what is now known as the blockchain or cryptoeconomy.

For the last year, one of the authors has been closely involved with a large European platform cooperative, SMart (.coop), which is also called a labor mutual. In a labor mutual, formally independent workers, who in the best of cases have a passionate life project that allows them to filter their work engagements, are able to create solidarity by converting their invoices into salaries, thereby gaining access to the social protections of the welfare state. These autonomous, post-subordinate workers, also represent a convergence model between the precariat and the salariat, and are prime candidates for the emerging commons economy, They have a big role in the creation of the post-corporate ecosystems that we will be describing in one of the chapters of this report. Please note that we do not see these new types of workers as the sole actors in transformation, but we do believe they play a very important role in this particular transition. To the degree that the laboring classes start to see themselves not as merely adversarial to the current system, but as active commoners in the creation of new life forms, they are also joining the new commoner or ‘hacker class.’[^35]

## Encadré : The role of labour mutuals,commonfare and post-subordinate workers
[Lire l'encadré]({{ site.baseurl }}/book/chapitre1_encart2.html)


[^23]: For example, we are exploring the concept of Distributed Income Support Cooperatives. https://wiki. P2Pfoundation.net/Distributed_Income_Support_Cooperatives
[^24]:	There are various competing notions for this third law, which is scientifically still contentious. We are using James Quilligan’s hypothesis because it makes the most sense in our specific context here.
[^25]:	The P2P Value research project was undertaken by a EU-funded research consortium of which the P2P Foundation was a partner. It also concluded that contributors identified with their transnational contributory community and that reputation functioned as a real capital good, opening access to resources. See: https://P2Pvalue.eu/
[^26]:	For a detailed treatment of transvestment, see https://wiki.P2Pfoundation.net/Transvestment
[^27]:	See our report, Peer to Peer and the Commons: A matter, energy and thermodynamic perspective. (parts I and II). By Céline Piques and Xavier Rizos with Michel Bauwens. P2P Foundation, 2016. Available at: https://commonstransition.org/peer-peer-commons-matter-energy-thermodynamic-perspective.
[^28]:	For the sources for these figures, see https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/ Does-sharing-cars-really-reduce-car-use-June%202017.pdf
[^29]:	Human and nature dynamics (HANDY): Modeling inequality and use of resources in the collapse or sustainability of societies. By Safa Motesharrei, Jorge Rivas and Eugenia Kalnay. Ecological Economics, Volume 101, May 2014, Pages 90-102. Source: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0921800914000615. Added discussion via https://wiki.P2Pfoundation.net/HANDY_Model_for_ Civilisational_Collapse_Scenarios
[^30]: Ecological Revolution: The Political Origins of Environmental Degradation and the Environmental Origins of Axial Religions; China, Japan, Europe. by Mark D. Whitaker. Details and discussion via https:// wiki.P2Pfoundation.net/Political_Origins_of_Environmental_Degradation_and_the_Environmental_ Origins_of_Axial_Religions.
[^31]: For a detailed description and analysis of these new and poorly compensated ‘digital labor’ practices, see: Heteromation, and Other Stories of Computing and Capitalism. By Hamid R. Ekbia and Bonnie A. Nardi. MIT Press, 2019.  
[^32]: This 19th-century controversy is discussed in detail in: Commun. Essai sur la révolution au XXIe siècle. Pierre Dardot and Christian Laval. La Découverte, 2017.
[^33]: Excerpts via (http://goo.gl/Q8GcO).
[^34]: We recommend the thoughtful treatment by Alex Foti in his General Theory of the Precariat. Source: http://networkcultures.org/blog/publication/general-theory-of-the-precariat.
[^35]: “The hacker class is the class with the capacity to create not only new kinds of object and subject in the world, not only new kinds of property form in which they may be represented, but new kinds of relation beyond the property form. The formation of the hacker class as a class comes at just this moment when freedom from necessity and from class domination appears on the horizon as a possibility…. Hackers must calculate their interests not as owners, but as producers.” Sourced from an interview with McKenzie Wark, at http://frontwheeldrive.com/mckenzie_wark.html.