---
layout: single
title: "1.3 : The emerging crypto economy as a signpost for the cosmo-local transition"
header:
    image : /assets/images/chapitre1.png
sidebar:
  nav: "book"
toc: true
toc_label: "Accès rapide"
toc_sticky: true
read_time: true
---

If we look at the evolution of contemporary commons, from the emergence of the immaterial ‘digital’ commons for knowledge, software and design, via the mostly redistributive provisioning systems of the urban commons, we now see the emergence of a new phase that involves bringing the use of the open- source and commons models straight into the physical production processes. For example, the Economic Space Agency speaks of a shift from open-source software production methodologies, to open-source economic spaces, i.e., from the mere production of knowledge, code and design, to full-scale economic cooperation around the production and distribution of all kinds of value so as to secure livelihoods.

The emergence of the distributed bitcoin currency, and most importantly its underlying infrastructure broadly discussed as blockchain technology, is a very important signpost in this regard, as we explain further in this document. In this chapter, we aim to provide a short explanation of this emergence, critiquing the current models from a P2P and commons-based point of view, so that we can suggest the main tweaks and transformations that are necessary for the support of a true, solidly commons-oriented mode of production and exchange in the sphere of physical production. This would combine our priorities for open and freely shared knowledge, respect for the biocapacity of the planet, and fair distribution of the rewards for common work.

The aim of this work is to see how, in our management of the production and distribution of value, we can ‘internalize’ what is presently ‘externalized,’ i.e., not accounted for and not cared for.

The design, emergence and success of bitcoin was a very important first pivot. Over the last decade, there has been an increasing number [^36] of locally-based complementary currencies, but with limited numbers of local users and turnover. To date, they very rarely achieve scale even in their local contexts.[^37] By contrast, bitcoin was the first attempt for a globally scalable currency that was based on social sovereignty, instead of corporate or state-based rule. The trust of the community was ensured, not by mediating third party institutions but by trust in the integrity of cryptographic rules. For the first time in recent history, we have a currency that was created autonomously and gained the trust of a global community, while achieving tangible and spectacularly recognized levels of market value. 
Following bitcoin, many other cryptocurrencies are also achieving relative success, even amid the speculative frenzy. We can observe a surge of permissionless creation of currencies, with a relatively autonomous capacity to allow value flow outside of the traditional banking channels, which gave rise to the idea of crypto- assets. These value flows are coordinated in more decentralized ways, even if new types of intermediaries may be facilitating this. Cryptocurrencies have thus been envisioned as a store of value and a kind of global reserve backing, like gold, but their usability in day-to-day exchanges in real marketplaces has not been realized, except very marginally. At any rate, cryptocurrencies introduce the idea of pluralist value streams and the circulation of assets in decentralized P2P networks.

However, even if the bitcoin code is open source and supported by a global community, there are also huge issues that do not make it an appropriate currency for the commons economy. Essentially, the commons are subsumed here to social and ecological extraction. On the one hand, social extraction, because the particular design means that early entrants can sell bitcoins at a higher price later (since production is designed to slow down and even stop over time, while demand grows without set limits, thereby structurally stimulating demand over supply).[^38] This has made bitcoin into a tool for financial speculation.39 On the other hand, ecological extraction, given that its production necessitates exponential energy usage.[^40]

Value in bitcoin is created through the monetary mechanism itself, not by the creation of productive value. In fact,bitcoins are created through an extremely resource-intensive process called “mining,” which is extremely capital- and resource-intensive, as it requires huge computational capacity. Bitcoin thus relies essentially on capitalist mechanisms for its existence.

Furthermore, almost the entirety of bitcoin mining has gradually been taken over by vast mining plants, specially designed to afford enormous processing power, making it almost impossible for single users to engage in any mining themselves.[^41] Hence, bitcoins for them can only be acquired in exchanges, again via the capitalist market (or by working for the owners).

Most cryptocurrencies are traded as financial assets on open markets, that is to say, their price is based on supply and demand, and is denominated in regular fiat currency. Value flows from one currency into another, but the currency is a representation that does not create value by itself any more than a balloon creates ‘volume.’ In other words, bitcoin owners extract rent from productive value creators in the rest of the economy: it is a distribution of rent-seeking.[^42] Bitcoin is most certainly a currency of and for the market, more specifically a currency for decentralized capitalist market dynamics, specifically for market forms that seek to escape governmental and societal control.

Beyond bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, a second generation of blockchains introduced autonomously executed computer processes broadly known as “smart contracts.” These are software programs stored on a blockchain and employ a set of predefined rules that may be enforced automatically once certain conditions are met. Multiple parties in a distributed network can access and interact with smart contracts, but they are largely autonomous and very difficult to reverse once deployed.

Ethereum was the first initiative supporting the deployment of smart contracts on a blockchain. It envisioned a potential use of blockchains that goes beyond the storage or reference of transactions, but may include any type of information that allows users to define the functionality of decentralized applications (dapps). Ethereum also implements its native cryptocurrency called “Ether” that, much like bitcoin, is allocated to miners through a similar process and can be transferred in the network.

Smart contracts gave rise to an ever-increasing number of potential uses of blockchains, on every domain where formal agreements have to be encoded and enacted, including financial transactions, insurance and securities, and intellectual property rules. Probably the most ambitious deployment of smart contracts has been new types of decentralised organisations, commonly referred as “Decentralized Autonomous Organizations” (DAOs), which rely purely on blockchain code and the distribution of tokens to enforce their rules to control decision-making and operations. The DAOs have stimulated discussions and experiments around the provisioning of digital services and transactions that take place with little or no direct human action, while they arguably cede agency to non-human subjects, including machines, objects or even natural ecosystems.

It is especially in this light that the blockchain, or more broadly ‘Distributed Ledger Technology’ (DLT) has been acknowledged as an even more radical innovation. We note that accounting and civilization have developed together. Writing was invented as a by-product of accounting, when temple-state, class- based civilizations emerged in Mesopotamia, to keep track of the coming and going of commodities in the temples’ storage places, as well as to record debts. These first forms of accounting accompanied the birth of class-based civilization and the accompanying state forms. When the Franciscan monk Pacioli standardized ‘double entry’ Venetian bookkeeping in the year 1494,[^43] it announced the birth of capital accumulation which would eventually engulf the whole world a few centuries later. Today, next-generation accounting models, such as Resources - Events - Agents[^44] abandon double-entry to favor ecosystem- and network-based accounting flows. What we get is something that goes beyond closed corporate accounting and potentially announces and accompanies a huge civilizational shift away from atomized institutions that compete with each other, and instead points towards a more networked structure based on much higher levels of collaboration over joint platforms.

The blockchain encodes and shows the viability of open and shared accounting in representing the multitude of transactions and actions occurring during physical production.

This is historic, as it allows us to move from corporate and nation-state accounting (which, even as they are publicly regulated and accessible to the public, are ‘privative’ accounting internal to bounded entities, in which externalities are invisible), to ecosystemic accounting in networks with multiple participants and in an environment of permissionless contributions. In other words, it allows for large-scale mutual coordination of physical production, and makes practical the scaling of circular economies. It is an extension of the principles of the open source economy, to physical production.

Distributed ledgers furthermore allow both the recognition of a variety of contributions, i.e., open and contributive accounting, but also the capacity to integrate directly the visioning and management of physical flows of matter and energy.[^45] This differs from the previous approaches such as Ecological Economics, that converted resources in price signals.46 The combination of distributed and shared ledgers, as well as the capacity to integrate externalities, constitute a radical innovation.

Presently, the production of immaterial value, i.e., knowledge, software and design, enables ‘stigmergic coordination’[^47] between permissionless contributors, who can access open and transparent depositories that represent the flow of work. With shared accounting, this capacity for mutual coordination moves to the physical plane. But because physical production calls for specific reciprocity in terms of material capital (which otherwise would get depleted), and not just the principle of free universal usage, it requires that distributed ledgers add this layer of value exchange.

To use the 19th-century language, for example, as used by Marx:

- As far as immaterial production is concerned, we already have the principle of ‘communism’ at work in the very heart of the capitalist economy (in its original sense of ‘everyone can freely contribute and everyone can freely use’), which some authors like Richard Barbrook have called cyber-communism (or ‘cybernetic communism’, Barbrook, 2015),[^48] because of the ‘abundance’ of digital knowledge which is easily and cheaply reproducible, and thereby overwhelms the scarcity dynamics of supply and demand, moving the market functions to the periphery of open-source production communities, with the commons in the middle. Paradoxically, this cooperative coordination is largely incorporated in the corporate economy, inspiring some scholars to speak of the ‘communism of capital.’[^49]
- In physical production, however, we need reciprocal flows to avoid depletion of non-renewable resources, either through market exchange (but not necessarily capitalist exchange) or through contributory recognition (‘to each according to his/her contribution;’ this was defined by Marx as ‘socialism’).[^50] Capitalist markets are nominally based on the idea of equal exchange, but in their actual practice they are based on the constant extraction of surplus, from nature and other humans, in order to accumulate capital in private hands.

Ethical and generative markets use monetary signals, but are not focused on profit maximisation. Many pre-capitalist markets were socially embedded, as Karl Polanyi has shown. We will later show that we need to move from pricing signals, which reflect current supply and demand – but not the necessities of protecting and maintaining resources in the long term – to monetary signals, i.e., to currencies that are directly related to the status of the natural resources we need to maintain and replenish.[^51] If such a linkage between the amount of natural reserves that are sustainably available and a corresponding monetary mass could be achieved, then the monetary signals themselves would be a technique for responsible material production.[^52] An example of this is the Fishcoin project, in which the amount of coins that can be spent reflect the stock of fish that can be used without endangering the reproduction of the fish.

So, the blockchain, like bitcoin, has received extensive attention and a huge wave of investments, viewing it as a new infrastructure layer for a more distributed economy. And precisely because it is linked to the design philosophy of bitcoin, it shares some of its fundamental limitations. Bitcoin’s design and infrastructure are based on an individualistic understanding of the economy that combines elements from the marginalist traditions, Austrian Economics, and ‘anarcho-capitalist,’ ‘propertarian’ philosophy. It is based on ‘methodological individualism,’[^53] the premise that society consists of individuals seeking maximum advantages in a competitive game in which every human being is seen as an entrepreneur, which contracts with others in order to conduct his or her business.

For example, when blockchain projects talk about governance and ‘consensus,’ what they emphatically don’t mean is collective governance based on democratic deliberation, but they merely mention the coordination of individual actions with common intentions.[^54] Because liberalism believes that the common good results from individual and corporate competition, it has no clear concept to articulate it other than the accumulation of individual gains, and it does not see the interdependence between the market and a whole host of societal and environmental realities. The commons and open- source dynamics are often appropriated to emphasize individual freedom, mostly restrained to a ‘one dollar, one vote’ context, disregarding the elements of social fairness and ecological sustainability.

As Arthur Brock has argued, there are no people and communities in the blockchain design, no community governance, ‘only transactions organized in blocks linked to a chain”;[^55] there is no organic connection between the blockchain and the open-source communities and commons that undergird it.[^56]

Furthermore, bitcoin and blockchain are not truly distributed, that is, consisting of equipotent peers that voluntarily create nodes through their free and open cooperation, but they are rather decentralized. This means that while they avoid the domination by vertically integrated oligarchic companies, they are still based on major power blocks, such as influential ‘miners,’ large investors, etc. Bitcoin’s inequality coefficient,[^57] measured by the Gini metric, is higher than the inequality in the sovereign currencies that it aims to replace. Blockchain has an oligarchic design,[^58] as most mechanisms used to reward contributions (the ‘proof of work’ mechanism) and resources (the ‘proof of stake’ mechanism) reward those that can already provide the most.

Sam Pospischil writes that “blockchains are too slow and expensive for a large variety of use-cases. If you look at something like, say, OriginTrail, they’ve built a separate overlay network to store structured graph data and document attachments. Pretty much everyone has something similar, with varying levels of “decentralised-ness” ranging from traditional SQL databases to networks that anyone can spin up and participate in just like a (public) blockchain.”[^59]

Different layers of the blockchain ecosystem are routinely dominated by a small group of dominant players, even if they have to contend with the other layers in the system: miners, developers, users.

**What matters in this report therefore, is not necessarily the blockchain idea in the narrow sense, but the generic concept of distributed ledgers.**[^60] Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to underestimate the innovative features of the blockchain design, which Sarah Manski has summarized.

[^36]: According to Bernard Lietaer, there are currently 6,000 to 7,000 types of local currencies: https:// payment21.com/blog/complementary-currencies-entering-digital-era
[^37]: New measurement techniques may be able to change this general appreciation. See the efforts of Grassroots Economics in Kenya and other African countries: https://www.grassrootseconomics.org/ single-post/2018/12/13/Proof-of-Impact
[^38]: Dan Kervick describes the problematic deflationary design as a scheme for extraction here: http:// neweconomicperspectives.org/2013/04/talking-bitcoin.html.
[^39]: We agree with the evaluation of James Gien Wong: “in hindsight, it was natural that it emerged at the intersection of distributed computing networks and capitalism, but from the commons perspective it is at the very bleeding edge. Its importance to the commons is that it proved that there is a global appetite for it, but it still shares fundamental DNA with the traditional form of extractive capitalism that birthed it. Now the job is to replace extractive distributed value exchange with a more equitable form.” From a comment to our draft report.
[^40]: See in particular: https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2017/12/bitcoins-insane-energy-consumption- explained/. For various additional statistics on its energy usage, see: https://wiki.P2Pfoundation.net/ Bitcoin#Energy_Usage_Aspects.
[^41]: There are mining pools (https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=1975844.0) and cloud mining services (https://hashflare.io/) (the latter considered problematic by many in the crypto community), that allow for individuals and groups to do their own mining.
[^42]: This discussion is separate from any recognition that a cryptocurrency network has a ‘value in itself’ as a new form of infrastructure. Philip Honigman argued in a comment on our draft: “irrational speculation aside, which certainly plays a role, there is a value intrinsic to decentralized autonomous money – and the cost to produce it, as excessive as it might seem today – is an inherent requirement to its production.”
[^43]: Luca Pacioli’s “Summa de arithmetica, geometria, proportioni et proportionalita” (1494, Venice: Paganino di Paganini) is regarded to be the first known printed treatise on double-entry bookkeeping. For more details see: Sangster, A. (2010). Using accounting history and Luca Pacioli to put relevance back into the teaching of double entry. Accounting, Business & Financial History, 20:1, 23-39.
[^44]: REA accounting is explained in chapter 3. It is an accounting solution for entities and individuals working in a networked ecosystem, and situates every transaction in the flow of all actors of that system.
[^45]: As an example, see footprint analysis: https://data.footprintnetwork.org/#/exploreData
[^46]: For example, see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecosystem_valuation#History_and_Economic_Model
[^47]: For details about stigmergic coordination, see: https://wiki.P2Pfoundation.net/Stigmergy
[^48]: Richard Barbrook (2000) CYBER-COMMUNISM: How the Americans are Superseding Capitalism in Cyberspace, Science as Culture, 9:1, 5-40, DOI: 10.1080/095054300114314.
[^49]: See our own article on this topic: From the Communism of Capital to Capital for the Commons: Towards an Open Cooperativism. By Michel Bauwens, Vasilis Kostakis. Triple C, Vol 12, No 1 (2014). Available at: http://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/561.
[^50]: See this article for the distinctions: https://j-humansciences.com/ojs/index.php/IJHS/article/view/3152. 
[^51]: An early proposal was the Terra, a global complementary currency designed to provide an inflation- resistant international standard of value; to stabilize the business cycle on a global level; and to realignstockholders interests with long-term sustainability. http://www.lietaer.com/2010/01/terra/
[^52]: Charles Eisenstein presents a proposal for this in Sacred Economics: “Once we have decided how much of each commons should be made available for use, we can issue money ‘backed’ by it. For example, we might decide that the atmosphere can sustain total sulfur dioxide emissions of two million tons a year. We can then use the emissions rights as a currency backing. The same goes for the rest of the commons. The result would be a long list comprising all the elements of the commons we agree to use for economic purposes.” See here for full context: http://sacred-economics.com/sacred-economics- chapter-11-currencies-of-the-commons/
[^53]: Rachel O’Dwyer writes: ““What kinds of subjectivity do we want to algorithmically inscribe into our systems? Blockchain start-ups begin from the assumption that there is no trust and no community, only individual economic agents acting in self-interest. Fair enough, you might think, it’s precisely the fact that projects like Ethereum engineer confidence and provide economic incentives for contribution that may distinguish it from other services like Freenet. But it also proceeds from a perspective that already presumes a neoliberal subject and an economic mode of governance in the face of social and/ or political problems. ‘How do we manage and incentivise individual competitive economic agents?’ In doing so, it not only codes for that subject, we might argue that it also reproduces that subject.”Source:	https://www.academia.edu/11627298/The_Revolution_Will_not_be_Decentralised_Blockchain- based_Technologies_and_the_Commons.
[^54]: “Even narrower is that consensus is a technical term describing how different nodes agree on which block to publish next. This article is part of a series on consensus and governance and is illustrative of the kinds of debates: https://blog.coinfund.io/the-consensus-series-part-i-the-basics-of-collectivity- a11d76ff4d5d.
[^55]: Arthur Brock writes: “In computer science, an ontology describes what EXISTS in a system. For example, in bitcoin what exists are transactions organized into blocks linked in a chain. The first transaction in each block gets to create new coins (cryptographic tokens). The other transactions spend a coin by signing (with a private key) the previous transaction to a new owner (using their public key as their address/identity). There are also nodes with which you send and receive transactions. Notice no people in that ontology. They don’t exist. With no people, there are no relationships, no communication, no interconnection, no community. How can a community that doesn’t exist regulate itself?” Cited from https://medium.com/metacurrency-project/cryptocurrencies-are-dead-d4223154d783.
[^56]: This is why, by contrast, Holochain is entirely ‘agent-centric,’ i.e., designed around people, see chapter 2.
[^57]: We have collated various figures about the unequal distribution of bitcoin, here: https://wiki. P2Pfoundation.net/Bitcoin#Bitcoin_inequality_statistics . For the Gini statistic, see: Gini Coefficient = 0.87709 ; Bitcoin Wealth Distribution extremely unequal (Bitcoinica data), the 1% own 50%; more at http://ow.ly/trKoy.
[^58]: “If someone tells you they’re building a “decentralized” system, and it runs a consensus algorithm configured to give the people with wealth or power more wealth and power, you may as well call bullshit and walk away.” Sourced from Arthur Brock at https://medium.com/holochain/blockchain- blind-spots-1904d490218d.
[^59]: This is copied from an email conversation with one of the authors.
[^60]: Please note that these collaborative or interoperable ledgers need not be tamper-proof. As noted in a comment by Marco Fioretti: “In some cases, namely food, delivering what promised may cause LOTS of extra pollution and consumption of raw materials. In addition, it may even destroy small producers, making informal/grey economy impossible, if it happens without simultaneous deep changes in tax and other regulations.”